[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](12.6%20-%20Focus%20on%20Software%20Engineering%20-%20Working%20with%20Multiple%20Files.md) | [Next Section](12.8%20-%20Creating%20Records%20with%20Structures.md) | [All Sections](/Module%205/Pearson%20Notes/)
***
#Module5 #PearsonNotes 
# 12.7 - Binary Files
**Binary files** contain data that is not necessarily stored as ASCII text.

All the files you’ve been working with so far have been text files. That means the data stored in the files has been formatted as ASCII text. Even a number, when stored in a file with the << operator, is converted to text. For example, consider the following program segment:
```c++
ofstream file("num.dat");
short x = 1297;
file << x;
```

The last statement writes the contents of x to the file. When the number is written, however, it is stored as the characters `1`, `2`, `9`, and `7`.
This is illustrated in [Figure 12-6](#Figure-12-6).

## Figure 12-6
| '1' | '2' | '9' | '7' | `<EOF>` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | ------- |
<u>1297 expressed in ASCII</u>
| 49  | 50  | 57  | 55  | `<EOF>` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | ------- |
The number 1297 isn't stored in memory (in the variable x) in the fashion depicted in the figure above, however. It is formatted as a binary number, occupying 2 bytes on a typical system.
[Figure 12-7](#Figure-12-7) shows how the number is represented in memory, using binary or hexadecimal.

## Figure 12-7
The value 1297 stored as a `short int` <br />
<u>1297 as a short integer, in binary</u>
| 00000101 | 00010001 | 
| -------- | -------- |
<u>1297 as a short integer, in hexadecimal</u>
| 05  | 11  |
| --- | --- |

The representation of the number shown in [Figure 12-7](#Figure 12-7) is the way the “raw” data is stored in memory. Data can be stored in a file in its pure, binary format. The first step is to open the file in binary mode. This is accomplished by using the `ios::binary` flag. Here is an example:
```c++
file.open("stuff.dat", ios::out | ios::binary);
```
Notice the `ios::out` and `ios::binary` flags are joined in the statement with the `|` operator. This causes the file to be opened in both output and binary modes.

**NOTE:** By default, files are opened in text mode.

# The `write` and `read` Member Functions 
## `Write` Member Function
The file stream object’s write member function is used to write binary data to a file. The general format of the `write` member function is:
```c++
fileObject.write(address, size);
```
- `fileObject` is the name of a file stream object.
- `address` is the starting address of the section of memory that is to be written to the file. This argument is expected to be the address of a `char` (or a pointer to a `char`).
- `size` is the number of bytes of memory to write. This argument must be an integer value.

For example, the following code uses a file stream object named `file` to write a character to a binary file:
```c++
char letter = 'A';
file.write(&letter, sizeof(letter));
```
The first argument passed to the `write` function is the address of the `letter` variable. This tells the write function where the data that is to be written to the file is located. The second argument is the size of the `letter` variable, which is returned from the `sizeof` operator. This tells the `write` function the number of bytes of data to write to the file. Because the sizes of data types can vary among systems, it is best to use the `sizeof` operator to determine the number of bytes to write. After this function call executes, the contents of the letter variable will be written to the binary file associated with the file object.

The following code shows another example. This code writes an entire `char` array to a binary file.
```c++
char data[] = {'A', 'B', 'C', 'D'};
file.write(data, sizeof(data));
```
In this code, the first argument is the name of the `data` array. By passing the name of the array, we are passing a pointer to the beginning of the array. Because `data` is an array of `char` values, the name of the array is a pointer to a char. The second argument passes the name of the array to the `sizeof` operator. When the name of an array is passed to the `sizeof` operator, the operator returns the number of bytes allocated to the array. After this function call executes, the contents of the data array will be written to the binary file associated with the file object.

## `Read` Member Function
The `read` member function is used to read binary data from a file into memory. The general format of the `read` member is:
```c++
fileObject.read(address,size);
```
- `fileObject` is the name of a file stream object.
- `address` is the starting address of the section of memory where the data being read from the file is to be stored. This is expected to be the address of a `char` (or a pointer to a `char`)
- `size` is the number of bytes of memory to read from the file. This argument must be an integer value.

For example, suppose we want to read a single character from a binary file and store that character in the `letter` variable. The following code uses a file stream object named `file` to do just that:
```c++
char letter;
file.read(&letter, sizeof(letter));
```
The first argument passed to the `read` function is the address of the `letter` variable. This tells the read function where to store the value that is read from the file. The second argument is the size of the `letter` variable. This tells the read function the number of bytes to read from the file. After this function executes, the `letter` variable will contain a character that was read from the file.


The following code shows another example. This code reads enough data from a binary file to fill an entire `char` array:
```c++
char data[4];
file.read(data, sizeof(data));
```
In this code, the first argument is the address of the `data` array. The second argument is the number of bytes allocated to the array. On a system that uses 1-byte characters, this function will ready 1 bytes from the file and store them in the `data` array.

## Program 12-13
This demonstrates writing a `char` array to a file, then reading the data file back into memory.
```c++
  // This program uses the write and read functions.
  #include <iostream>
  #include <fstream>
  using namespace std;

  int main()
  {
     const int SIZE = 4;
     char data[SIZE] = {'A', 'B', 'C', 'D'};
     fstream file;

     // Open the file for output in binary mode.
     file.open("test.dat", ios::out | ios::binary);

     // Write the contents of the array to the file.
     cout << "Writing the characters to the file.\n";
     file.write(data, sizeof(data));

     // Close the file.
     file.close();
     
     // Open the file for input in binary mode.
     file.open("test.dat", ios::in | ios::binary);

     // Read the contents of the file into the array.
     cout << "Now reading the data back into memory.\n";
     file.read(data, sizeof(data));

     // Display the contents of the array.
     for (int count = 0; count < SIZE; count++)
        cout << data[count] << " ";
     cout << endl;

     // Close the file.
     file.close();
     return 0;
 }

// =============== Output ===============
// Writing the characters to the file.
// Now reading the data back into memory.
// A B C D
// ======================================
```

# Writing Dat other than `char` to Binary Files
## `reinterpret_cast` Type Cast
Because the `write` and `read` member functions expect their first argument to be a pointer to a char, you must use a type cast when writing and reading items that are of other data types. To convert a pointer from one type to another, you should use the `reinterpret_cast` type cast. The general format of the type cast is:
```c++
reinterpret_cast<dataType>(value)
```
where `dataType` is the data type that you are converting to, and value is the value that you are converting. For example, the following code uses the type cast to store the address of an `int` in a `char` pointer variable:
```c++
int x = 65;
char *ptr = nullptr;
ptr = reinterpret_casat<char *>(&x);
```

The following code shows how to use the type cast to pass the address of an integer as the first argument to `write` member function:
```c++
int x = 27;
file.write(reinterpret_cast)<char *>(&x), sizeof(x));
```
After the function executes, the contents of the variable x will be written to the binary file associate with the `file` object.  The following code shows an `int` array being written to a binary file:
```c++
const int SIZE = 10;
int numbers[SIZE] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10};
file.write(reinterpret_cast<char *>(numbers), sizeof(numbers));
```
After this function call executes, the contents of the numbers array will be written to the binary file. The following code shows values being read from the file and stored into the `numbers` array:
```c++
const int SIZE = 10;
int numbers[SIZE];
file.read(reinterpret_cast<char *>(numbers), sizeof(numbers));
```

## Program 12-14
Demonstrates writing an `int` array to a file then reading the data from the file back into memory.
```c++
  // This program uses the write and read functions.
  #include <iostream>
  #include <fstream>
  using namespace std;

  int main()
  {
     const int SIZE = 10;
     fstream file;
     int numbers[SIZE] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10};

     // Open the file for output in binary mode.
     file.open("numbers.dat", ios::out | ios::binary);

     // Write the contents of the array to the file.
     cout << "Writing the data to the file.\n";

     file.write(reinterpret_cast<char *>(numbers), sizeof(numbers));

     // Close the file.
     file.close();

     // Open the file for input in binary mode.
     file.open("numbers.dat", ios::in | ios::binary);

     // Read the contents of the file into the array.
     cout << "Now reading the data back into memory.\n";
     file.read(reinterpret_cast<char *>(numbers), sizeof(numbers));

     // Display the contents of the array.
     for (int count = 0; count < SIZE; count++)
         cout << numbers[count] << " ";
     cout << endl;

     // Close the file.
     file.close();
     return 0;
 }
// =============== Output ===============
// Writing the data to the file.
// Now reading the data back into memory.
// 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
// ======================================
```
***
[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](12.6%20-%20Focus%20on%20Software%20Engineering%20-%20Working%20with%20Multiple%20Files.md) | [Next Section](12.8%20-%20Creating%20Records%20with%20Structures.md) | [All Sections](/Module%205/Pearson%20Notes/)