[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](14.9%20-%20Focus%20on%20Object-Oriented%20Programming.md) | [Next Section (Go to Next Chapter)](../../Module%208/Pearson%20Notes/15.1%20-%20What%20is%20Inheritance.md) | [All Sections](/Module%207/Pearson%20Notes/)
***
#Module7 #PearsonNotes <br />
# 14.10 - Rvalue References and Move Semantics
C++ has always been regarded as a high-performance language. Typically, it is the language of choice for developers who need to write fast, efficient code. The C++ 11 standard introduced new features that make C++ even faster and more efficient. One of these new features is the ability to use **move semantics** in your classes. In certain situations, you can use move semantics to greatly improve the performance of assignment operations. You can also use move semantics to write a new type of constructor known as a move constructor. Before we can discuss move semantics, however, we must introduce another new topic: rvalue references.

## Lvalues and Rvalues
During the execution of a program, numerous entities, such as variables, class objects, and so on, are created in memory. For example, look at the following `main` function:
```c++
int main()
{
    int x = 0;

    x = 12;
    cout << x << endl;
    return 0;
}
```
In this code, an `int` variable named `x` is created in line 3. Although the variable is created by the statement in line 3, it is meant to be accessible to other statements. In fact, any statement in the variable’s scope can use the name `x` to access the variable. For example, line 5 assigns the value 12 to the `x` variable, and line 6 displays the contents of the `x` variable.

Some entities, such as the variable ﻿`x` in the previous example, are created by definition statements and meant to exist in memory long enough for other statements to access them. Other entities, however, are meant to exist only temporarily. For example, look at the following code fragment:
```c++
int x;
x = 2 * 6;
```
When the second statement executes, the system evaluates the expression on the right side of the `=` operator. In this case, it gets the value of 2 * 6 and stores the result, 12, as a temporary value. Then, it copies the temporary value to the `x` variable. After the statement executes, the temporary value is no longer needed, so the system discards it.

Values that are returned from functions are also stored as temporary values. When a function returns a value, you have to immediately do something with the value, or you will lose it. For example, look at the following code fragment:
```c++
  int square(int a)
  {
     return a * a;
  }
  
  int main()
  {
     int x = 0;

     x = square(5);
     cout << x << endl;
     return 0;
  }
```
Consider the statement in line 10. We can summarize the statement by saying it calls the `square` function, and assigns the value that is returned from the `square` function to the variable `x`. But more specifically, all of the following things happen when this statement executes:
- The `square` function is called, and the value 5 is passed as an argument.
- The `square` function calculates 5 * 5 and stores the result, 25, as a temporary value.
- The temporary value is copied (assigned) to the variable `x`.
-   The temporary value is no longer needed, so the system discards it.

To further illustrate this, look at the following code fragment:
```c++
  int square(int a)
  {
    return a * a;
  }
  
  int main()
  {
     int x = 0;
     
     square(5);
     cout << x << endl;
     return 0;
  }
```
In this code, the statement in line 10 calls the `square` function, but it doesn’t do anything with the value that is returned. As in the previous example, the value 25 is stored as a temporary value. But, in this example, the value is lost forever after the statement has finished executing.

So, we have two types of values stored in memory during the execution of a program:
- Values that persist beyond the statement that created them, and have names that make them accessible to other statements in the program. In C++, these values are called `lvalues`.
- Values that are temporary, and cannot be accessed beyond the statement that created them. In C++, these values are called `rvalues`.
***
**TIP:** Perhaps the simplest way to think of an lvalue is this: it is an expression that can be written on the left side of an assignment operator.
***
# Rvalue References
In a past chapter, you learned that a reference variable is a variable that refers to the memory location of another variable. For example, look at the following code fragment:
```c++
int x = 34;
int &ref = x;
```
In this code, the variable ref is a reference variable. In a declaration, a reference is indicated by the presence of an ampersand (`&`) between the type and the variable’s identifier. In C++ 11 and later, this type of reference is called an **lvalue reference** because it can refer only to lvalues.

C++ 11 also introduced the concept of an **rvalue reference**, which is a reference variable that can refer only to temporary objects that would otherwise have no name. An rvalue reference is declared similarly to an lvalue reference, except with a double ampersand (`&&`). The code below uses an rvalue reference to print the square of 5:
```c++
int &&rvalRef = square(5);
cout << rvalRef << endl;
```
The first statement calls the square function, passing 5 as an argument. The function returns the value 25, which is stored as a temporary value. The address of the temporary value is then assigned to `rvalRef`. So, now we have given a name to the temporary value, so it can be accessed by other statements.

When you assign an rvalue reference to a temporary value, you are giving a name to the temporary value and making it possible to access the value from other parts of the program. Therefore, you are transforming a temporary value into an lvalue. Because an rvalue reference cannot refer to an lvalue, the following code will not compile:
```c++
int x = 0;
int &&rvalRef = x; // Error!
```

Look at the following initialization statement:
```c++
int &&rvalRef1 = square(5);
```
After this statement executes, the memory location containing the value returned by `square(5)` has a name, `rvalRef1`, so `rvalRef1` itself becomes an lvalue. This means that a subsequent initialization statement such as:
```c++
int &&rvalRef2 = rvalRef1; // Error!
```
will not compile, because `rvalRef1` is no longer an rvalue. Fortunately, there is a positive consequence of all this: a temporary object can have at most one lvalue reference pointing to it. If a function has an lvalue reference to a temporary object, you can be sure no other part of the program has access to the same object. This fact is important in understanding how move operations, to be discussed next, work.

# Move Semantics
When objects are passed as arguments into functions, and returned from functions, the program does a lot of work behind the scenes, allocating memory and copying values. To illustrate, let’s look at the `Person` class.
```c++
#ifndef PERSON_H
#define PERSON_H
#include <cstring>
using namespace std;

class Person {
 private:
  char *name = nullptr;

 public:
  // Default constructor
  Person() {
    name = new char[1];
    *name = 0;
  }

  // Constructor with a parameter
  Person(char *n) {
    name = new char[strlen(n) + 1];
    strcpy(name, n);
  }

  // Copy constructor
  Person(const Person &obj) {
    name = new char[strlen(obj.name) + 1];
    strcpy(name, obj.name);
  }

  // Destructor
  ~Person() { delete name; }
  // Copy assignment operator
  Person &operator=(const Person &right) {
    if (this != &right) {
      name = new char[strlen(right.name) + 1];
      strcpy(name, right.name);
    }
    return *this;
  }
  // getName member function
  char *getName() const { return name; }
};
#endif
```
The `Person` class has three constructors: a default constructor, a parameterized constructor, and a copy constructor. It also has an overloaded `=` operator, and a member function to get the name member variable. We are going to use this class to demonstrate some of the work that happens when an object is passed around in a program. But first, we are going to insert some `cout` statements so we can see when the constructors and the destructor are called, as well as the overloaded `=` operator. The modified class is shown here, followed by [Program 14-18](#Program-14-18) which demonstrates the class.

#### Contents of `Person.h`
```c++
#ifndef PERSON_H
#define PERSON_H
#include <iostream>
#include <cstring>
using namespace std;

class Person
{
private:
   char *name;
public:
   // Default constructor
   Person()
   { cout << "*** default constructor ***\n";
     name = nullptr; }
     
   // Constructor with a parameter
   Person(char *n)
   { cout << "*** parameterized constructor ***\n";
     name = new char[strlen(n) + 1];
     strcpy(name, n); }

   // Copy constructor
   Person(const Person &obj)
   { cout << "*** copy constructor ***\n";
     name = new char[strlen(obj.name) + 1];
     strcpy(name, obj.name); }

   // Destructor
   ~Person()
   { cout << "*** destructor ***\n";
     delete [] name; }

   // Overloaded = operator
   Person & operator=(const Person &right)
   { cout << "*** assignment operator ***\n";
     if (this != &right)
     {
        if (name != nullptr)
           delete[] name;
        name = new char[strlen(right.name) + 1];
        strcpy(name, right.name);
     }
     return *this; }
     
   // getName member function
   char *getName() const
   { return name; }
};
#endif
```

## Program 14-18
```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include "Person.h"
using namespace std;

// Function prototype
Person makePerson();
void displayPerson(Person);

int main()
{
   Person person;
   person = makePerson();
   displayPerson(person);
   return 0;
}

Person makePerson()
{
   Person p("Will MacKenzie");
   return p;
}

void displayPerson(Person p2)
{
   cout << p2.getName() << endl;
}

// ================================ Output ================================
// *** default constructor ***         (1) Object named person created in main
// *** parameterized constructor ***   (2) Object named p created in makePerson
// *** copy constructor ***            (3) Temporary object created as a copy of p
// *** destructor ***                  (4) Object p destroyed
// *** assignment operator ***         (5) Temporary object assigned to person in main
// /*** destructor ***                  (6) Temporary object destroyed
// *** copy constructor ***            (7) p2 parameter object in displayPerson
// Will MacKenzie                      (8) Displayed by the cout statement in line 26
// *** destructor ***                  (9) p2 parameter object destroyed
// *** destructor ***                 (10) person object in main destroyed
// =========================================================================
```
In the program’s output, the numbered comments that are shown to the right are not part of the output. We have added those so we can refer to specific lines of the program in our discussion.

Let’s step through the execution of the program, and take a closer look at its output:
- In the main function, the statement in line 12 creates a local `Person` object named `person`. This statement causes the `Person` class’s default constructor to execute, displaying the output in line (1).
- Line 13 calls the `makePerson` function. Inside the `makePerson` function, the statement in line 20 creates a `Person` object named `p`, passing `“Will MacKenzie”` to the constructor. This causes the output in line (2) to be displayed.
- In line 21, the `makePerson` function returns the `Person` object named `p`. Before the function terminates, however, a temporary object is created, as a copy of the `p` object. This causes the temporary object’s copy constructor to be called, displaying the output in line (3).
- As the `makePerson` function terminates, the `p` object is destroyed, causing the output in line (4) to be displayed.
- In line 13, the temporary object is assigned to the `person` object. This causes the `Person` class’s overloaded `=` operator to be called, displaying the output in line (5).
- The temporary object is destroyed, causing the `Person` class’s destructor to be called. This displays the output in line (6).
- Line 14 calls the `displayPerson` function, passing the `person` object as an argument.
- In line 24, the p2 parameter object is created as a copy of the `person` object. This calls the copy constructor, and displays the output in line (7).
- Line 26 displays the output shown in line (8).
- The `displayPerson` function terminates, causing the p2 parameter to be destroyed. This calls the `Person` class’s destructor, displaying the output in line (9).
-  In main, line 15 ends the program, causing the `person` object to be destroyed. The output in line (10) is displayed by the `Person` class’s destructor.

We are especially interested in line 13:
```c++
person = makePerson();
```
that calls the `makePerson()` function:
```c++
Person makePerson()
{
	Person p("Will MacKenzie");
	return p;
}
```
The `makePerson()` function creates a local `Person` object named `p`. When the function returns p, a temporary object is created as a copy of `p`. This causes the Person class’s copy constructor to execute. The copy constructor allocates a block of memory to hold the `name` array, then copies the `name` array from `p` to the temporary object.

Then in line 13, the overloaded assignment operator executes to copy the temporary object to the person object. The overloaded assignment operator also allocates a block of memory, and copies the `name` array from the temporary object to the `person` object. As you can see, the copy assignment goes to great lengths to avoid pointer sharing between the temporary object and the person object, but then right after that, the temporary object is destroyed and its `name` array is deleted.

With C++ 11 and later, we can add another assignment operator function, known as a **move assignment operator**, to the `Person` class. The idea behind the move assignment operator is to avoid all this work by simply swapping the members of the object being assigned with the temporary object. That way, when the temporary object is destroyed, its destructor deletes the memory that was previously owned by `person`, and person avoids having to copy the elements that were in the temporary object’s `name` array.

The move assignment operator function for the `Person` class follows. To simplify the code, we have used the STL library function swap to swap the contents of two memory locations. The `swap` function is declared in the **`<algorithm>`** header file (you will learn more about the functions in the **`<algorithm>`** header file in [Chapter 17]).
```c++
// Move assignment operator
Person& operator=(Person&& right)
{
	if (this != &right)
	{
		swap(name, right.name);
	}
	return *this;
}
```
Compare the class’s move assignment operator to the class’s copy assignment operator:
```c++
// Copy assignment operator
Person &operator=(const Person &right) {
  if (this != &right) {
    name = new char[strlen(right.name) + 1];
    strcpy(name, right.name);
  }
  return *this;
}
```
Notice the function header for the move assignment operator is different from the function header for the copy assignment operator in two ways:
- The move assignment operator takes an rvalue reference as parameter. This is because a move assignment should only be performed when the source of the assignment is a temporary object.
- The parameter in the move assignment operator is not `const`. This is because “moving” a resource from an object modifies it.

The move assignment, introduced in C++ 11, is much more efficient than copy assignment, and it should be used whenever the object being assigned from is temporary. There is also a *move constructor*, which should be used when creating a new object by initialization from a temporary object.

If you add a move assignment operator to a class, you should also add a **move constructor** to the class. A move constructor avoids unnecessary copying of data by “stealing” it from the temporary object. Here is the move constructor for the `Person` class. Again, note the parameter to the constructor is an rvalue reference, denoting that the parameter is a temporary object.
```c++
// Move constructor
Person(Person&& temp) {  // Steal the name pointer from temp.
  name = temp.name;
  // Nullify the temp object's name pointer.
  temp.name = nullptr;
}
```
Note the parameter in the move constructor cannot be `const`. In addition, the temporary object that is the source for the move constructor must be left in a state that will allow its destructor to run without causing errors. That is why, in the `Person` class’s move constructor, we set the temporary object’s `name` pointer to `nullptr` before the function ends.

# When to Implement Move Semantics in a Class
Anytime you write a class that contains a pointer or a reference to an outside piece of data, you should include a copy constructor, a move constructor, a copy assignment operator, and a move assignment operator. By adding move operations to such a class, you will ensure the best performance for your code.

At runtime, the move constructor and move assignment operator are automatically called when appropriate. Specifically, the compiler uses a move operation whenever an object is being assigned the value of a temporary object, or initialized with a copy of a temporary object.

## Default Operations Provided by The Compiler
The motivation for writing copy constructors, move constructors, copy assignment operators, move assignment operators, and destructors is to make sure a class properly manages and disposes of resources, such as dynamically allocated memory. Writing all of these operations for each class can be tedious, so the compiler tries to help out by generating default implementations for them. Let’s assume we compile the following class:
```c++
class MyClass
{
private:
  int mydata = 0;
public:
  int
  getMyData ()
  {
    return mydata;
  }
  void
  setMyData (int d)
  {
    mydata = d;
  }
};
```
The compiler will automatically generate the following:
- A default constructor `MyClass()`
- A copy constructor `MyClass(const MyClass &)`
- A copy assignment operator `MyClass & operator=(const MyClass &)`
- A move constructor `MyClass(MyClass &&)`
- A destructor `~MyClass()`

Keep in mind if you write your own version of any of these member functions, the compiler will not provide any of the default versions. So, if you write one of these member functions, you should write all of the others as well. For example, if you write a copy constructor for a class, then you should also write a move constructor, a copy assignment operator, a move assignment operator, and a destructor.

Alternatively, you can use the `default` keyword to declare which default operations you want the compiler to automatically provide. For example, look at the following class:
```c++
class MyClass
{
private:
  int mydata = 0;
public:
  // Constructors provided by default
  MyClass() = default;
  MyClass(const MyClass&) = default;
  MyClass(MyClass&&) = default;

  // Parameterized constructor
  MyClass(int n)
  { mydata = n; }

  // Destructor
  ~MyClass() = default;

  // Copy assignment operator
  MyClass& operator=(const MyClass&) = default;

  // Accessor
  int getMyData() const
  { return mydata; }

  // Mutator
  void setMyData(int d)
  { mydata = d; }
};
```
Notice the use of the `default` keyword in lines 8, 9, 10, 17, and 20. Here is a summary of each of those declarations:
- Line 8 causes the compiler to generate a default constructor.
- Line 9 causes the compiler to generate a default copy constructor.
- Line 10 causes the compiler to generate a default move constructor.
- Line 17 causes the compiler to generate a default destructor.
- Line 20 causes the compiler to generate a default copy assignment operator.

You can also use the `delete` keyword to declare which default operations you do not want the compiler to automatically provide. For example, if you want to make sure that objects of a particular class cannot be copied, you can explicitly tell the compiler to delete the copy constructor, move constructor, and copy assignment operator. Here is an example:
```c++
class MyClass
{
private:
   int mydata = 0;
public:
   // Constructors provided by default
   MyClass() = default;
   MyClass(const MyClass&) = delete;
   MyClass(MyClass&&) = delete;
   
   // Parameterized constructor
   MyClass(int n)
   { mydata = n; }

   // Destructor
   ~MyClass() = default;

   // Deleted copy assignment operator
   MyClass& operator=(const MyClass&) = delete;

   // Accessor
   int getMyData() const
   { return mydata; }

   // Mutator
   void setMyData(int d)
   { mydata = d; }
};
```
Notice the use of the `delete` keyword in lines 9, 10, and 20. Here is a summary of each of those declarations:
- Line 9 tells that the compiler that we do not want a default copy constructor.
- Line 10 tells that the compiler that we do not want a default move constructor.
- Line 20 tells that the compiler that we do not want a default copy assignment operator.
As a result of these declarations, objects of the `MyClass` class cannot be copied by a constructor or by an assignment operator.
***
# [Programming Project](!%20Unit%2014%20Answers.md#Programming-Project)
[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](14.9%20-%20Focus%20on%20Object-Oriented%20Programming.md) | [Next Section (Go to Next Chapter)] | [All Sections](/Module%207/Pearson%20Notes/)