[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](13.1%20-%20Procedural%20and%20Object-Oriented%20Programming.md) | [Next Section](13.3%20-%20Defining%20an%20Instance%20of%20a%20Class.md) | [All Sections](/Module%206/Pearson%20Notes/)
***
#Module6 #PearsonNotes
### Since this section is a (little) long, here are a table of contents for each section (In Order):
#### Table of Contents
- 13.2 - Introduction to Classes
- [Access Specifiers](#Access-Specifiers)
- [Public Member Functions](#Public-Member-Functions)
	- [Using `const` with Member Functions](#Using-const-with-Member-Functions)
- [Placement of `public` and `private` Members](#Placement-of-public-and-private-Members)
- [Defining Member Functions](#Defining-Member-Functions)
- [Accessors and Mutators](#Accessors-and-Mutators)
	- [Using `const` with Accessors](#Using-const-with-Accessors)
- [The Importance of Data Hiding](#The-Importance-of-Data-Hiding)

# 13.2 - Introduction to Classes
A *class* is similar to a structure. It is a data type defined by the programmer, consisting of variables and functions. The declaration statements inside a class declaration are for the variables and functions that are members of the class.
```c++
class ClassName
{
	declaration;
	// more declarations
	// may follow
};
```
In C++, a class's **private members** are hidden and can be accessed only by functions that are members of the same class. A class's **public members** may be accessed by code outside the class.

### `Rectangle` Class Example
```c++
class Rectangle
{
	double width;
	double length;
}
```
There is a problem with this class, however. Unlike structures, the members of a class are private by default. Private class members cannot be accessed by programming statements outside the class. So, no statements outside this Rectangle class can access the `width` and `length` members.
Recall from our earlier discussion on object-oriented programming that an object can perform data hiding, which means that critical data stored inside the object are protected from code outside the object.

#### [BACK TO THE TOP](#Table-of-Contents)

# Access Specifiers
C++ provides the key words `private` and `public`, which you may use in class declarations. These key words are known as **access specifiers** because they specify how class members may be accessed.
```c++
class ClassName
{
	private:
		// declarations of private members
	public:
		// declarations of public members
};
```
Access specifiers are followed by a colon `(:)` then followed by one ore more member declarations. In this general format, the `private` access specifier is used first. All of the declarations that follow it, up to the `public` access specifier, are for private members. Then, all of the declarations that follow the `public` access specifier are or public members.

#### [BACK TO THE TOP](#Table-of-Contents)

# Public Member Functions
To allow access to a class's `private` member variables, you create public member functions that work with the private member variables.
For example, consider the [`Rectangle` Class](#Rectangle-Class-Example). To allow access to a `Rectangle` object's `width` and `length` variables, we will add the member functions listed in [Table 13-3](#Table-13-3).

### Table 13-3
The Rectangle Class's Member Functions
| Member Function | Description |
| --------------- | ----------- |
| `setWidth`| This function accepts an argument, which is assigned to the width member variable.
| `setLength`| This function accepts an argument, which is assigned to the length member variable.
| `getWidth`| This function returns the value stored in the width member variable.
| `getLength`| This function returns the value stored in the length member variable.
| `getArea`| This function returns the product of the width member variable multiplied by the length member variable. This value is the area of the rectangle.
For the moment, we will not actually define the functions described in [Table 13-3](#Table-13-3). We leave that for later. For now, we will only include declarations, or prototypes, for the functions in the class declaration.
```c++
class Rectangle {
	private:
		double width;
		double length;
	public:
		void setWidth(double);
		void setLength(double);
		double getWidth() const;
		double getLength() const;
		double getArea() const;
};
```
In this declaration, the member variables `width` and `length` are declared as `private`, which means they can be accessed only by the class’s member functions. The member functions, however, are declared as `public`, which means they can be called from statements outside the class. If code outside the class needs to store a width or a length in a `Rectangle` object, it must do so by calling the object’s `setWidth` or `setLength` member functions. Likewise, if code outside the class needs to retrieve a `width` or `length` stored in a `Rectangle` object, it must do so with the object’s `getWidth` or `getLength` member functions. These public functions provide an interface for code outside the class to use `Rectangle` objects.

**NOTE:** Even though the default access of a class is private, it’s still a good idea to use the private key word to explicitly declare `private` members. This clearly documents the access specification of all the members of the class.

## Using `const` with Member Functions
Notice the key word `const` appears in the declarations of the `gitWidth`, `getLength`, and `getArea` member functions.
When the key word `const` appears after the parentheses in a member function declaration, it specifies that the function will not change any data stored in the calling object. If you inadvertently write code in the function that changes the calling object’s data, the compiler will generate an error. As you will see momentarily, the `const` key word must also appear in the function header.

#### [BACK TO THE TOP](#Table-of-Contents)

# Placement of `public` and `private` Members
The placement of `public` and `private` members do not matter. You can switch them.
```c++
class ClassName
{
	public:
		// members
	private:
		// members
};
```
In addition, it is not required that all members of the same access specification be declared in the same place.
```c++
class ClassName
{
	private:
		// members
	public:
		// members
	private:
		// members
}
```
Even though you have the freedom to do this, you should adopt a consistent standard.

***
**NOTE:** Notice in the example that the first character of the class name is written in uppercase. This is not required, but serves as a visual reminder that the class name is not a variable name.
***

#### [BACK TO THE TOP](#Table-of-Contents)

# Defining Member Functions
The `Rectangle` class declaration contains declarations or prototypes for five member functions: [`setWidth`, `setLength`, `getWidth`, `getLength`, and `getArea`](#Table-13-3). The definitions of these functions are written outside the class declaration.
```c++
//**************************************************************
// setWidth assigns its argument to the private member width.  *
//**************************************************************

void Rectangle::setWidth(double w)
{
	width = w;
} 

//****************************************************************
// setLength assigns its argument to the private member length.  *
//**************************************************************** 

void Rectangle::setLength(double len)
{
	length = len;
}

//***********************************************************
// getWidth returns the value in the private member width.  *
//***********************************************************

double Rectangle::getWidth() const
{
	return width;
}

//*************************************************************
// getLength returns the value in the private member length.  *
//*************************************************************
double Rectangle::getLength() const
{
	return length;
}

//******************************************************
// getArea returns the product of width times length.  *
//******************************************************
double Rectangle::getArea() const
{
	return width * length;
}
```
In each function definition, the following precedes the name of each function: `Rectangle::`. The two colons are called the **scope resolution operator**. When `Rectangle::` appears before the name of a function in a function header, it identifies the function as a member of the `Rectangle` class.
Here is the general format of the function header of any member function defined outside the declaration of a class: `ReturnType ClassName::functionName(ParameterList)`. In the general format, `ReturnType` is the function’s return type. `ClassName` is the name of the class of which the function is a member. `functionName` is the name of the member function. `ParameterList` is an optional list of parameter variable declarations.

***
**WARNING!** Remember, the class name and scope resolution operator extends the name of the function. They must appear after the return type and immediately before the function name in the function header. The following would be incorrect: `Rectangle:: double getArea() // Incorrect`
In addition, if you leave the class name and scope resolution operator out of a member function’s header, the function will not become a member of the class: `double getArea() // Not a member of the Rectangle class!`
***

#### [BACK TO THE TOP](#Table-of-Contents)

# Accessors and Mutators
A member function that gets a value from a class’s member variable but does not change it is known as an **accessor**. A member function that assigns a value to a member variable is known as a **mutator**. In the Rectangle class, the member functions `getLength` and `getWidth` are accessors, and the member functions `setLength` and `setWidth` are mutators.
Some programmers refer to mutators as **setter functions** because they set the value of an attribute, and accessors as **getter functions** because they get the value of an attribute.

## Using `const` with Accessors
Notice the key word `const` appears in the headers of the `getWidth`, `getLength`, and `getArea` member functions, as shown here:
```c++
double Rectangle::getWidth() const
double Rectangle::getLength() const
double Rectangle::getArea() const
```
Recall that these functions were also declared in the class with the `const` key word. When you mark a member function as `const`, the `const` key word must appear in both the declaration and the function header.

In essence, when you mark a member function as `const`, you are telling the compiler that the calling object is a constant. The compiler will generate an error if you inadvertently write code in the function that changes the calling object’s data. Because this decreases the chances of having bugs in your code, it is a good practice to mark all accessor functions as const.

#### [BACK TO THE TOP](#Table-of-Contents)
.
# The Importance of Data Hiding
As a beginning student, you might be wondering why you would want to hide the data that is inside the classes you create. As you learn to program, you will be the user of your own classes, so it might seem that you are putting forth a great effort to hide data from yourself. If you write software in industry, however, the classes that you create will be used as components in large software systems; programmers other than yourself will use your classes. By hiding a class’s data and allowing it to be accessed through only the class’s member functions, you can better ensure that the class will operate as you intended.

#### [BACK TO THE TOP](#Table-of-Contents)
***
# [Quiz for This Section](!%20Unit%2013%20Answers.md#Quiz-13-2)
[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](13.1%20-%20Procedural%20and%20Object-Oriented%20Programming.md) | [Next Section](13.3%20-%20Defining%20an%20Instance%20of%20a%20Class.md) | [All Sections](/Module%206/Pearson%20Notes/)