[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](13.4%20-%20Why%20Have%20Private%20Members.md) | [Next Section](13.6%20-%20Inline%20Member%20Functions.md) | [All Sections](/Module%206/Pearson%20Notes/)
***
#Module6 #PearsonNotes
# 13.5 - Focus on Software Engineering: Separating Class Specification from Implementation
In the programs we’ve looked at so far, the class declaration, member function definitions, and application program are all stored in one file. A more conventional way of designing C++ programs is to store class declarations and member function definitions in their own separate files. Typically, program components are stored in the following fashion:
- Class declarations are stored in their own header files. A header file that contains a class declaration is called a class specification file. The name of the **class specification file** is usually the same as the name of the class, with a `.h` extension. For example, the Rectangle class would be declared in the file `Rectangle.h`.
- The member function definitions for a class are stored in a separate .cpp file called the **class implementation file**. The file usually has the same name as the class, with the .cpp extension. For example, the `Rectangle` class’s member functions would be defined in the file Rectangle.cpp.
- Any program that uses the class should `#include` the class’s header file. The class’s .cpp file (which contains the member function definitions) should be compiled and linked with the main program. This process can be automated with a project or make utility. Integrated development environments such as Visual Studio also provide the means to create the multi-file projects.
***
# [Quiz for This Section](!%20Unit%2013%20Answers.md#Quiz-13-5)
[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](13.4%20-%20Why%20Have%20Private%20Members.md) | [Next Section](13.6%20-%20Inline%20Member%20Functions.md) | [All Sections](/Module%206/Pearson%20Notes/)