[Table of Contents](README.md) | [Next Section]() | [Previous Section]()
#Module4 #PearsonNotes 
# 11.1 Abstract Data Types
The term **abstract data type (ADT)** is very important in computer science and is especially significant in object-oriented programming.

## Abstraction
An **abstraction** is a general model of something. It is a definition that includes only the general characteristics of an object.

## Data Types
C++ has several **primitive data types**, or data types that are defined as a basic part of the language.

### Table 11-1
| Primitive Data Types |                    |                        |
| -------------------- | ------------------ | ---------------------- |
| `bool`                 | `short int  `        | `long long int  `        |
| `char`                 | `unsigned short int` | `unsigned long long int` |
| `char_16_t`            | `int `               |                        |
| `char_32_t`            | `unsigned int `      | `float`                  |
| `wchar_t`              | `long int`           | `double `                |
| `unsigned` char        | `unsigned long int`  | `long double  `                     |

A data type defines what values a variable may hold. Each data type that was listed has its own range of values. Data types also define what values a variable may not hold.
In addition to defining a range or domain of values that a variable may hold, data types also define the operations that may be performed on a value:
`+ - * / > < >= <= == !=`

Only the integer data types only allow for operations with the modulus operator (%). So a data type defines what values an object may hold, and the operations that may be performed on the object.

The primitive data types are abstract in the sense that a data type and a variable of that data type are not the same thing. For example:
```c++
int x = 1, y = 2, y = 3;
```
In this statement, the integer variables x, y, and z are define. They are 3 separate instances of the data type `int`. Each variable has its own characteristics. The data type `int` is the abstraction, and the variables x, y, and z are concrete occurrences.

## Abstract Data Types
An abstract data type (ADT) is a data type created by the programmer and is composed of one or more primitive data types. The programmer decides what values are acceptable for the data type, as well as what operations may be performed on the data type. In many cases, the programmer designs his or her own specialized operations.

For example, suppose a program is created to simulate a 12-hour clock. The program could contain three ADTs: `Hours`, `Minutes`, and `Seconds`. The range of values for the `Hours` data type would be the integers 1 through 12. The range of values for the `Minutes` and `Seconds` data types would be 0 through 59. If an Hours `object` is set to 12 and then incremented, it will then take on the value 1. Likewise, if a `Minutes` object or a `Seconds` object is set to 59 then incremented, it will take on the value 0.

Abstract data types often combine several values. In the clock program, the `Hours`, `Minutes`, and `Seconds` objects could be combined to form a single `Clock` object. In this chapter, you will learn how to combine variables of primitive data types to form your own data structures, or ADTs.
