[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](11.8%20-%20Returning%20a%20Structure%20from%20a%20Function.md) | [Next Section](11.10%20-%20Pointers%20to%20Structures.md) | [All Sections](/Module%204/Pearson%20Notes/)<br />

-----
#Module4 #PearsonNotes 
# 11.9 - Using Structured Bindings with Structures
Structured binding declarations can be also used to unpack structures. A structured binding declaration allows you to write one statement that defines a set of variables and initializes those variables that are stored in a structure. Here is the general format of a structured binding declaration when used with a structure:
```c++
auto [variable1, variable2, etc...] = structuerVar;
```

The statement begins with the auto key word, followed by a list of variable names enclosed in square brackets (`[]`). Next, an assignment operator appears, followed by the name of structure variable. When the statement executes, the variables that are named inside the square brackets will be defined and initialized with the values that are stored in the structure.

The variables that are defined inside the brackets are initialized with the structure’s members in the order that they are declared. In other words, `variable1` is initialized with the value of the first structure member, `variable2` is initialized with the value of the second structure member, and so on. The number of variables that are listed inside the square brackets must be the same as the number of members in the structure. Otherwise, a compiler error will occur.

For example:
```c++
struct Automobile
{
	string make;
	int year;
	double mileage;
}
```

Suppose that we define a structure variable name `car` with the following statement:
```c++
Automobile car = {"Porsche", 2020, 12400.0};
```

The following statement is a structured binding declaration that unpacks the structure variable and assigns the values of its members to variables:
```c++
auto [first, second, third] = car;
```

This statement defines 3 variables: `first`, `second`, and `third`. The data type of these variables is determined like this:
- The `first` variable is a `string` since it will be assigned the value of the `car.make` member
- The `second` variable is a `int` since it will be assigned to the value of the `car.year` member.
- The `third` variable `double` since it will be assigned the value of the `car.mileage` member.
After the statement executes, the `first` variable will be assigned the string “Porsche,” the `second` variable will be assigned 2020, and the `third` variable will be assigned 12400.0.

## Program 11-8
Example of structured bindings unpacking a structure that is returned from a function
```c++
  // This program uses a structured binding declaration to 
  // unpack a structure that is returned from a function. 
  #include <iostream> 
  #include <string> 
  using namespace std; 
  
  struct Contact 
  {
      string name;
      string email;
  };

  // Function prototype
  Contact getContact();

  int main()
  {
      // Get the user's contact info.
      auto [userName, userEmail] = getContact();

      // Display the user's contact info.
      cout << "You entered:" << endl;
      cout << userName << endl;
      cout << userEmail << endl;
      return 0;
  }

  //**********************************************
  // The getContact function gets the user's     *
  // contact info and returns it as a structure. *
  //**********************************************
  
  Contact getContact()
  {
      // Temporary Contact variable
      Contact c;

      // Get the contact info.
      cout << "Enter your name: ";
      getline(cin, c.name);
      cout << "Enter your email address: ";
      getline(cin, c.email);

      return c;
  }
  
// =============== Output ===============
// Enter your name: Jill Johnson [Enter]
// Enter your email address: jjohnson@example.com [Enter]
// You entered:
// Jill Johnson
// jjohnson@example.com
// ======================================
```

Let’s take a closer look at the program. Lines 7–11 declare the `Contact` structure, with two members: `name` and `email`. Lines 33–45 define a function named `getContact` that gets the user’s name and email address, and then returns a `Contact` structure containing those values.

In the main function, the statement in line 19 contains a structured binding declaration that calls the `getContact` function. The structure that is returned from the function is unpacked, and the members’ values are assigned to the `userName` and `userEmail` variables. Those variables are then displayed.

-----
[Table of Contents](/README.md) | [Previous Section](11.8%20-%20Returning%20a%20Structure%20from%20a%20Function.md) | [Next Section](11.10%20-%20Pointers%20to%20Structures.md) | [All Sections](/Module%204/Pearson%20Notes/)<br />